---
layout: post
title: Layout
---

I have been trying to learn everything I can about visual design. I am a
programmer by trade, but I have a strong personal bent toward creating things
that are pleasing to the eye. Over the past year and a half, I’ve tried to get
as much experience as I can in this area, without neglecting my primary
business, which is writing code.

A couple of months ago I had the opportunity to spend some time with [John Long] [1]
working on a new home page design for [RoleModel Software] [2]. John is a very
talented guy, and I was eager to understand how he approaches his designs. This
was the first opportunity I had to sit down with a real designer and observe
how he works.

  [1]: http://wiseheartdesign.com
  [2]: http://rolemodelsoftware.com

As I worked with John, there were two things that stood out to me about the way
he approached the design. As a programmer, I find myself more comfortable to do
work in code than anywhere else. The design projects I had done up to this
point were all written from beginning to end in HTML, CSS, Javascript, and Ruby
scripts to generate images. But John’s approach was very different. I’ve spent
some time thinking about his approach, and I’ve drawn what I think are some
interesting conclusions.

The first thing he did was to try to figure out what belonged on the page. I
had expected him to proceed pretty quickly to creating a look, or a structure
for the page, but instead, he kept agonizing over which elements did and didn’t
belong on the page.

The next thing he did was to start up Fireworks and begin moving those elements
around on a mostly blank canvas. I’ve always disliked laying anything out in an
image editor because it seemed like CSS was more powerful, and also more
realistic, but I began to understand that there was a very powerful advantage
to beginning here.

These two observations have led me to a completely different understanding of
the concept of layout than I had before. I came to this understanding without
having any name or description to refer to it. Since that time, I’ve heard John
refer to it as the “content-out” approach, which I think is a good way to
describe it, but may bear some further explanation.

### Two Ways

The difference between the two approaches can be seen in two different ways the
word “layout” can be used. Before I learned the new approach, I might talk
about “creating a layout”, by which I meant putting together a structure of
sections and containers that would begin to express the overall look of a page,
without the need for any real content. Now, I would use the word “layout” in a
different sense. I would rather talk about “laying everything out”, than about
a “layout” as a thing in itself. In a sense, the old way is the static noun
form, and the new way is the active verb form.

When I used to create layouts, I would try to imagine what set of containers I
would need—maybe a header, a sidebar, and a main section—and then I would start
assigning various elements of my content to the various containers. Sometimes
one container ended up being underused, and I would have to figure out “what to
put there”, while another one would be filled to overflowing.

But the way John worked, he began by discovering what the content would be, and
then by spreading it all out in Fireworks like so many puzzle pieces. He kept
moving the different bits around until the arrangement started making sense.
The design was made from content rather than containers.

### Space

One of the really important things I’ve learned about visual design is to
appreciate empty space. Space makes a design feel clean and crisp, like when
you clean up your room. I’ve found it challenging to create designs that have
this feeling of clean organization. Too often a page starts to feel cluttered,
like a messy room, or too sparse, like an empty one.

I think that this new approach to layout will make it much less of a struggle
to use empty space effectively. When you create a layout of containers, you
have to draw all the containers first, chopping up all the space you have into
little boxes. When you then fill those containers, you mostly consider the
relationship of the content to the container. The opportunities for breathing
room in the design become limited.

But when you lay everything you have out on the table and start arranging it,
your design practically is space. You separate things with space first, and
then with lines only if they are needed. The result is a design that feels
cleaner, and simpler, but no less structured.

### Form

Another thing about the content-out approach is that the focus is on the real
relationships between various elements on the page. The different pieces of the
design are arranged based on what their proximity and alignment ought to be,
rather than what it can be, or has to be, because of the layout.

The benefit of this is that form of the layout corresponds to the form of the
content. In other words, the layout will feel natural and logical, rather than
forced. In a sense, this is the way that form follows function in the
discipline of web design.

### Redesign

As I was contemplating these ideas, I happened to think about my experience
redesigning the application pages in Courtyard. I consider that project to be
the best design work I’ve done so far, both in terms of the end result, and
also in terms of how effective my methods seemed to be while I was doing it. In
retrospect, I seem to have used the content-out approach on that project
without realizing it.

I had already had to figure out what elements belonged on each page when I did
the first design. When I decided to redo the design, all the content was
already in place, so the only way to proceed was to take what was there and
start rearranging it. My hope is that I will be able to apply the content-out
approach on future projects so that I can be as effective as I was on that
project, without out having to do the whole thing twice.

### Conclusion

It may be that all of this seems very basic and obvious to you. It does to me
now, but it didn’t before. I’ve heard a number of people describe the design
process in terms of “creating a layout”, which I consider to be the wrong
approach. John also remarked that designers typically begin the other way
around.

I think it is also important for the people who work with or employ designers
to understand this principle. It will fall on them to provide the content that
the designer needs before he can begin laying things out. To demand that a
layout be created before the content has been discovered will prevent the
designer from doing his best work.

I hope these ideas will help us to create more cohesive, beautiful designs, and
that understanding them will help us to serve and collaborate with our
customers more effectively.

